spell-check-custom-dictionary/README.md, before:

# Explainer: Spell Check Custom Dictionary API

## Authors

* Ziran Sun  \<zsun@igalia.com\>
* Jihye Hong

## Table of Contents
  - [Introduction](#introduction)
  - [User-Facing Problem](#user-problem)
  - [Proposed Approach](#proposed-approach) 
  - [Accessibility, Internationalization, Privacy, and Security Considerations](#security)
  - [Stakeholder Feedback / Opposition](#stakeholder)
  - [References & acknowledgements](#reference)

## <a name="introduction"></a> Introduction

This explainer proposes a new API, Spell Check Custom Dictionary API, to allow pages to selectively suppress spell check violations.

## <a name="user-problem"></a> User-Facing Problem

When spell-checking is enabled, browsers check the spellings of words against those in installed dictionary/dictionaries(locally or at the server side).  The misspelt words will then be marked for spelling errors.

However, there are specific cases where words are not in the dictionaries but still valid. For example,

- A website dedicated to Pokémon might feature the names of various Pokémon characters, such as Pikachu and Charmander.
- A website related to analyzing the economic market status might include the terminology related to companies' names and products that do not come from standard dictionaries but are valid in the context.

When the "valid" words are marked for spelling errors in these kinds of circumstances, it could be misleading, frustrating and distractive for some users.

It would be useful that websites can have options to treat those "site specific" words as correct to prevent browsers' spell checkers from marking them for spelling errors.

## <a name="proposed-approach"></a> Proposed Approach

### Spell Check Custom Dictionary API

We are introducing a new interface: the SpellCheckCustomDictionary API. As the name sugguests, it is a dictionary created and customized by websites/developers for spell checking related tasks. The proposed API will allow the web page to add, remove words, typically those not in the dictionary/dictionaries that browsers already have, in the custom dictionary. During the spelling check, the spellchecker will also check words against this custom dictionary. This mechanism gives the pages an option to selectively suppress spell check violations on their own page.

It is noted that some browsers allow users to add/remove words via the browsers’ setting panel, which is normally managed via the browser process. The SpellCheckCustomDictionary API is a different concept. The SpellCheckCustomDictionary API fills the gap that allows pages to programmatically modify the dictionary on a per-document basis and it is managed by the render process.

#### SpellCheckCustomDictionary.words attribute

Since the words in the dictionary are mutable, we are adopting the concept of ObservableArray. This observable array can be modified like a JavaScript Array.

#### SpellCheckCustomDictionary.lang attribute

Language tag for the dictionary.


### Example

```js
const wordData = [
  { word: 'Igalia' },
  { word: 'Wolvic' }, 
  { word: 'Orca' }
];

const wordObjects = wordData.map(p => new CustomWord(p.word));

// Create the SpellCheckCustomDictionary instance.
var customDict = new SpellCheckCustomDictionary();
// Add language tag.
customDict.lang = 'en-GB';

// Assign the word objects to the dictionary instance.
// The attribute is an ObservableArray.
customDict.words = wordObjects;

// Dynamically add or remove words in the dictionary.
customDict.words.push(new CustomWord('Interop'));
customDict.words.pop();

```

### Per-document based dictionary

The spell check custom dictionary is a transient dictionary and lives no longer than the life cycle of the associated document. It is a per-document based in implementation. As an example, we have described the design for Chromium at [The Per-Document Design in Chromium](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1ND1a1Z4i6kXMHqMwEyRkHSj5VVTWgX5Ya0aNLgVQYGw/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.5z9kcz3slooe).

### Interop with other components

Handling customer or domain specific terminology/phrases/words probably is not the use case only for spell checker. For example, Web Speech has introduced [Contextural biasing API](https://github.com/WebAudio/web-speech-api/blob/main/explainers/contextual-biasing.md) to handle domain-specific terminology, proper nouns, or other words that are unlikely to appear in general conversation. How this work interops with other existing or future components and avoid overlapping as much as possible should be considered during implementations. We discussed about this for Chromium case at [Interop with other components](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1ND1a1Z4i6kXMHqMwEyRkHSj5VVTWgX5Ya0aNLgVQYGw/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.ei2z5z5y38p4).

## <a name="security"></a> Accessibility, Internationalization, Privacy, and Security Considerations

The *Spell Check Custom Dictionary* data is transient and will be released once a document or tab is closed in Chromium.  

We are not foreseeing any particular network violation introduced.

## <a name="stakeholder"></a> Stakeholder Feedback / Opposition
## <a name="reference"></a> References & Acknowledgements

Commit message:

tweaks for additional cases / clarity in the README for Spell Check Custom Dictionary API
Enhanced the explanation of the Spell Check Custom Dictionary API by adding details about its benefits and addressing a few more potential aspects of user-facing problems.  Also a few minor language tweaks.

spell-check-custom-dictionary/README.md, after:

# Explainer: Spell Check Custom Dictionary API

## Authors

* Ziran Sun  \<zsun@igalia.com\>
* Jihye Hong

## Table of Contents
  - [Introduction](#introduction)
  - [User-Facing Problem](#user-problem)
  - [Proposed Approach](#proposed-approach) 
  - [Accessibility, Internationalization, Privacy, and Security Considerations](#security)
  - [Stakeholder Feedback / Opposition](#stakeholder)
  - [References & acknowledgements](#reference)

## <a name="introduction"></a> Introduction

This explainer proposes a new API, Spell Check Custom Dictionary API, to allow pages to selectively suppress spell check violations, offer better spelling correction suggestions, and potentially enable user agents to explore additional future niceties.

## <a name="user-problem"></a> User-Facing Problems

Browsers offer various things related to spell-checking, correction and completion.  Browsers accomplish this via comparison with words in installed dictionary/dictionaries(locally or at the server side). The misspelt words will then be marked for spelling errors, and/or offered as potential corrections, suggestions or completions.

However, there are specific cases where words are not in those existing dictionaries but still valid in the context of the page. For example,

- A website dedicated to Pokémon might feature the names of various Pokémon characters, such as Pikachu and Charmander.
- A website related to analyzing the economic market status might include the terminology related to companies' names and products that do not come from standard dictionaries but are valid in the context.

When the "valid" words are marked for spelling errors in these kinds of circumstances, it could be misleading, frustrating and distracting.

It would be useful for websites to have options to treat those "site specific" words as if they were in the known dictionaries.


## <a name="proposed-approach"></a> Proposed Approach

### Spell Check Custom Dictionary API

We are introducing a new interface: the SpellCheckCustomDictionary API. As the name sugguests, it is a dictionary created and customized by websites/developers for spell checking related tasks. The proposed API will allow the web page to add, remove words, typically those not in the dictionary/dictionaries that browsers already have, in the custom dictionary. During the spelling check, the spellchecker will also check words against this custom dictionary. This mechanism gives the pages an option to selectively suppress spell check violations on their own page.

It is noted that some browsers allow users to add/remove words via the browsers’ setting panel, which is normally managed via the browser process. The SpellCheckCustomDictionary API is a different concept. The SpellCheckCustomDictionary API fills the gap that allows pages to programmatically modify the dictionary on a per-document basis and it is managed by the render process.

#### SpellCheckCustomDictionary.words attribute

Since the words in the dictionary are mutable, we are adopting the concept of ObservableArray. This observable array can be modified like a JavaScript Array.

#### SpellCheckCustomDictionary.lang attribute

Language tag for the dictionary.


### Example

```js
const wordData = [
  { word: 'Igalia' },
  { word: 'Wolvic' }, 
  { word: 'Orca' }
];

const wordObjects = wordData.map(p => new CustomWord(p.word));

// Create the SpellCheckCustomDictionary instance.
var customDict = new SpellCheckCustomDictionary();
// Add language tag.
customDict.lang = 'en-GB';

// Assign the word objects to the dictionary instance.
// The attribute is an ObservableArray.
customDict.words = wordObjects;

// Dynamically add or remove words in the dictionary.
customDict.words.push(new CustomWord('Interop'));
customDict.words.pop();

```

### Per-document based dictionary

The spell check custom dictionary is a transient dictionary and lives no longer than the life cycle of the associated document. It is a per-document based in implementation. As an example, we have described the design for Chromium at [The Per-Document Design in Chromium](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1ND1a1Z4i6kXMHqMwEyRkHSj5VVTWgX5Ya0aNLgVQYGw/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.5z9kcz3slooe).

### Interop with other components

Handling customer or domain specific terminology/phrases/words probably is not the use case only for spell checker. For example, Web Speech has introduced [Contextural biasing API](https://github.com/WebAudio/web-speech-api/blob/main/explainers/contextual-biasing.md) to handle domain-specific terminology, proper nouns, or other words that are unlikely to appear in general conversation. How this work interops with other existing or future components and avoid overlapping as much as possible should be considered during implementations. We discussed about this for Chromium case at [Interop with other components](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1ND1a1Z4i6kXMHqMwEyRkHSj5VVTWgX5Ya0aNLgVQYGw/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.ei2z5z5y38p4).

## <a name="security"></a> Accessibility, Internationalization, Privacy, and Security Considerations

The *Spell Check Custom Dictionary* data is transient and will be released once a document or tab is closed in Chromium.  

Browsers already use designs that prevent observation or detection of words in the local dictionaries through style or DOM observations.

We do not foresee any particular network violation introduceds.


## <a name="stakeholder"></a> Stakeholder Feedback / Opposition
## <a name="reference"></a> References & Acknowledgements
